---
layout: post
title: Sets
published: true
categories: [Mathematics]
---

This post is built for documentation and self-revision and wouldn't be structured very well. It is written with the intent to remember basic concepts of mathematics which will inevitably be needed to study any discipline which involves quantitative analysis.

<hr>

## Sets

A set is a collection of items.

**Sets are unordered**. They are not sequences and duplicates don't matter.

*Cardinality* of a set is the number of elements in the set. When the items in a set are countable, that's a finite set and when you cannot count the number of elements, it's an infinite set. Infinite sets cannot be listed out (meh, obviosuly!).

> Not every collection of items is a set. for eg. collection of all sets is not a set (Russel's Paradox)

## Elements

*Items of a set are called elements*. They could be written as

\\[ 5 \in \mathbb{N}, -6 \not\in \mathbb{N} \\]

## Subsets

`X` is a subset of `Y` iff every element of `X` is in `Y`. It is denoted as

\\[ \mathbb{N} \subset \mathbb{Z}, \mathbb{Z} \subset \mathbb{Q}, \mathbb{R} \not\subset \mathbb{Q}, \\]

Every set is a subset of itself.

### Equality of sets

Two sets `X` and `Y` are equal iff \\[ \mathbb{X} \subseteq \mathbb{Y} \ \& \ \mathbb{Y} \subseteq \mathbb{X} \\] 

Proper subset means the two sets aren't equal and one set is a subset of the other and not the other way round. For eg. Naturals are proper subset of Integers.

## Empty set & Powerset

Empty set has no elements and is denoted by \\( \Phi \\)

Powerset is a set of subsets of a given set (including the empty set).

A set with n elements has \\( 2^n \\) subsets.

## Set Comprehension

We can only do Set comprehension only when we have an existing set. Then we take some elements (filter from that set) and prepare the subset.

A set of all even integers could be \\( \{ x \| x \in \mathbb{Z}, 2 \| x \} \\)

A set of perfect squares is  \\( \{ x \| x \in N, \sqrt{x} \in \mathbb{N} \} \\)

Closed Intervals -> [0,1] is a set such that \\( \{ x \| x \in \mathbb{X} \ 0 \leq r \leq 1 \} \\)

Open Intervals -> [0,1] is a set such that \\( \{x \| x \in \mathbb{X} 0 \ \lt r \lt 1 \} \\)

Union - Combinatin of two sets. denoted as \\( X \cup Y \\)

Intersection - Common elements across two sets. Denoted as \\( X \cap Y \\)

Set Difference - X - Y or X \ Y means elements in X but not in Y. 

Complement - elements not in `X` i.e. \\( \bar{X} \\), it is always defined wrt a Universal Set to specify bounds from which to pick the subset.

## Cartesian Product

 \\( A \times B = \{ \( a, b\) \| a \in A, b \in B \} \\)

 Ordering of the element pairs matters in Cartesian Product. You can visualize the product of two sets of Integers as the 2-Dimensional Space.

 If we would want to filter out a set of elements which are of interest to us, then that subset would be called as a *Relation*. When the cartesian product is taken between two sets and we do this filtering, it would be a *Binary Relation*.

 **Binary Relation:**  \\( R \subset A \times B \\)

 Special Binary Relations:

 - *Identity Relation:*  \\( I \subset A \times A \; I = \{ \( a, b\) \| \( a, b\) \in A \times A, a = b  \} \\)

- *Reflexive Relation:* It will include identity relation pairs and other pairs as well. For eg. consider pairs of numbers which are perfect divisors of other numbers. All the identity pairs will be present because every number divides itself.

- *Symmetric Relation:* It must include all elements of the form `(a, b)` and `(b, a)` for eg. all natural number pairs whose absolute difference is 2 for instance. Or all pairs of numbers whose gcd is 1.

- *Transitive Relation*: It states that if `a` is related to `b` and `b` is related to `c`, then `a` is related to `c` i.e. if two pairs `(a, b)` and `(b, c)` are in the subset of the generator product, then `(a, c)` must also be there in the subset. Division for instance follows this relation.

- *Antisymmetric Relation*: It states that if `(a,b)` is in the subset, `(b,a)` must not be in the subset i.e. the relation is only one way; it mustn't be the other way round.

> `Equivalence Relations` are a class of relations such that they are reflexive, symmetric and transitive.
